Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lop, and
today I'm joined by your return guest, Doctor Rebecca
Neuberger Goldstein. She's, of course, for people who don't
know her, a philosopher, novelist, public intellectual, and today
we're going to talk about her latest book, The
Mathering Instinct, How Our Deepest Longing Drives Us and
divides us, so. Dr. Goldstein, welcome back to the
show. I mean, it's been 7 years, so
7 years, yes, 7 long eventful years since I
saw you last. Yes, yeah,
we went through an entire pandemic, and,
yes, yes, yes, and all sorts of world shattering.
Events,
so yeah, which perhaps are somewhat relevant to the
matter we're going to talk about today. So uh
what actually matter, I mean it's interesting that I
use that verb here. So what is it to
matter? What does it mean?
Yeah, so, uh, of course we speak about. What
matters, and we speak about who matters. Um, AND
I think in both cases, if you get down
to its very core, it means to be deserving
of attention. Uh, WHEN we say something doesn't matter,
it's not deserving of attention. Uh, I, I think
that's the basic core meaning, and, and I think
it opens to look at that definition, um, opens
the concept up. To how interesting it is because
that, I mean, attention is very interesting, yes, uh,
but deserving this term is, it's what philosophers call
a normative term. It involves norms of justification. It
involves justification. It involves values, deservingness. So, yeah, when
we're saying that something matters, we are. Invoking norms
of justification, values. And that's the kind of creatures
we are. We are creatures of matter who belong
to matter. I think that gets at the very
essence of us, uh, and, uh, shows why we
are so very different from the other animals with
which we share this planet, not very well, um.
We don't share it. We don't respect other animals
very, very much. We, it's hard enough to get
us to respect all humans, but in any case,
that really shows the sort of normative core of
us.
Mhm. And why do you call mattering an instinct?
I mean, do you look at it as something
that has evolved, that is part of our evolved
psychology? Yeah,
I do, and I, I take it back to
the very basic laws of nature, which is physics.
I started out in physics. It's been a long
road away from physics, and I have always, when
I was an under since I was an undergraduate,
then Obsessed with the second law of thermodynamics, law
that says we are all tending towards everything, everything
in the universe, the universe itself is tending towards
disorder, randomness, exhaustion, um, and I thought even, you
know, as a, as a student of, of, of
physics, wow, this somehow has some sort of Human
dimension to it, right? And, and it, and it
does. That's one of the things I'm trying to
solve, um, in, in the, uh, in this book,
but because, um, entropy means, uh, literally, uh, transformation
from within. And what it says is that in
a closed system, meaning one that doesn't have recourse
to external sources of energy, um, in a closed
system, um, the entropy. Increases, uh, until it reaches,
uh, equilibrium in which no work can be done,
nothing can be done, and that's the direction of
everything, sadly, but We living systems are not closed
systems. We living organisms, being a closed system is
not compatible with life. We have recourse to external
energy in the form of food, uh, low entropy,
uh, food, and, uh, and, and light, um, and
that's how we can do the work of resisting
entropy and all. The laws of biology, um, are
derived, as the great physicist Erwin Schrodinger wrote in
What Is Life. They're all derived from this resistance
to entropy. That's the business of life. Viva la
resistance, right? We are, that's what, that's what life
is. So. Um, WHAT this means, um, is that
we all evolved every living thing from the bacteria
to us, you know, us complicated creatures, um, have
evolved to take our own. Perpetuation, our own survival,
our own flourishing as fundamental. This is, we, we're
devoted to this, and we creatures who have evolved
attention, spend the bulk of our attention on ourselves,
on the environment, and how it relates to us.
We have evolved to feel ourselves automatically by default,
by nature, by biology, by the deepest. Organizing principle
of all the instincts to feel ourselves to be
deserving of attention, like nothing else in the world
is. So that has evolved in us, but something
else has also evolved in us, and only us,
which is with these complicated big Energy, hungry, greedy
brains of ours, um, because they have to be
so ordered, and it takes so much energy to
fight the entropy that keeps our brains ordered. We
have evolved the capacity for self-reflection. That's another capacity
that we have evolved. When you put these two
things together, are paying so much attention to ourselves
and our ability to step outside of ourselves in
this evolved capacity for self-reflection, and look at ourselves
and see how much attention we pay to ourselves,
how much attention we feel ourselves to be deserving
of, the question arises in us, the existential question.
Why am I deserving of all of this? Why
do I feel that I matter so much? There's
such a gap, unless we're a lunatic, some of
whom are right now in power in our world,
unless you are such a lunatic that you think
you are the most important thing in the whole
world, um. For those of us who are less
than who are not lunatics, we ask, how do
I justify this, and we want to get to
work improving ourselves somewhat more deserving, worthy, earning, um,
this attention that we have to pay to ourselves.
I compare it to, you know, we have, I
don't know, this is true all over the world,
but we have in our universities, um. Certain students
that we call legacy students, they're gonna get in,
their parents gave a lot of money. And they're,
they're gonna get in whether they deserve it or
not. I've had, I've had some students, legacy students,
some of them work their little butts off to
get in on their own merits. It's, it's guaranteed
they're gonna get in, their parents' money is going
to get them in, but that's, that's not what
they want for their own self-respect, they want to
earn their admittance. That's what we're like. By default,
we're gonna pay ourselves tremendous amount of attention. We
have to in order to pursue our complicated lives.
Um, THERE'S something called the, um, default network mode
when we're not paying attention to anything out there.
What are we paying attention to ourselves? We're fantasizing,
we're remembering, we're wishing, we're It's, it's ourselves. So
to see this, um, and is to want to
rationalize it, to justify it, that gives rise to
what I call the mannering instincts. So it's sort
of The collision or the joining together of two
evolved instincts. Right, yeah,
yeah, yes, it makes sense,
but, yeah,
but let me ask you then, because um I
mean, do you agree that er when it comes
to mattering for us as humans, it's not mattering
in a sort of er absolutely individualistic and atomized
manner, right? I mean we care about mattering to
other people as well, and we care about our
social standing and we care about how we matter
to the people we have relationships with because of
course, uh as uh as people like Joe Henry,
Karen Orenz Zion, and Stephen Hein coined the term
weird, I mean, we in the West tend to
live in. In these weird societies right where we
care a lot, a lot about our, our individualism,
but actually it's not just about us as individuals,
it's it's, it's also about um our relation to
other people and our social standing as well.
Yeah, absolutely, so. Uh, YOU know, Freud had said
that the two cornerstones of humanness are love and
work. Now I would say I would. Amend this
somewhat. There are two cornerstones of our well-being, our
flourishing, deep down motives without which We feel that
our lives are not going well. One is, uh,
what the social psychologists call belonging or connectedness, that
there are people who you regard as in your
life, um, and that they will pay you special
attention, whether you deserve it or not. I mean,
this is certainly how I feel about My family,
you know, I will pay them attention, whether they
deserve it or not, and my friends, so that's
sort of what it is to be a friend,
you know, one's one's one's lovers, one's one's spouse,
one's family, one's, you know, maybe one's colleagues, one's
community, one's neighbors, whatever, people who are in your
life, and without that, Um, you know, and, and
you may not love them. I would, you know,
I think Freud's word love is a little too,
um, specific. No, I mean, they may drive you
mad, but they are in your life, and, and
you, you have this connection to them, and you,
you matter to them, and maybe they even matter
to you, which is the way it ought to
be, but isn't always. So that's connectedness, right? And
But there is this other, and it has to
do with our relationships with others, uh, and it
can also be put in the terms of mattering,
and also when I talk about mattering, that's what
people assume I'm talking about. No, I'm talking about
this other thing that is also A deep motive.
Freud says work, and that shows you a lot
about how he went about trying to satisfy his
mannering in by way of his intellectual work, um,
but there are many ways that people have in
order to feel, uh, In order to do right
by not their relationship with others, but their relationship
with themselves, you know, this, this sort of existential
moment that I think we all go through, maybe
particularly when we're adolescents or early adulthood, or but
for some of us over and over again, we
need convincing again and again that we truly matter.
I certainly belong to that group, but, um, that
we have to convince ourselves that we are deserving,
deserving of our own attention. Um, THAT, that we
care so much about ourselves. What, why should I,
you know, what, what makes me deserving of all
of this? If I would Um, uh, Estimate the
size of something by how much attention I give
it. If that's, if, if that's the, the uh
measure of how much something matters, it would seem,
and it seems that way to each of us,
that the thing we think matters the most in
the universe is ourselves, given all the attention that
we give it. And that is, that causes a
deep unease, and we try to go about making
All the attention we give ourselves more commensurate with
who we are. We go about it in such
different ways. Freud, yes, work. I'm also of that
sort, work, yes, yes, I have to be working
constantly, um, but, and which is not to say
that the connectedness is not important. The connectedness is
always, that's a given, we are gregarious creatures evolved
from gregarious creatures. We can explain that very, very
well. There's this other thing, this other existential need,
um, and I divide. So I think we're all
alike in this, that we need this, um. And
then I, I, there, I divide us into four
different groups according to which our strategies, uh, for
trying to go about realizing this, this mattering, this
longing to matter. We're creatures.
So that's the socializers, the transcenders, the competitors, and
the heroic, the heroic strivers,
right?
Yeah,
and I, so I have been talking to people
about this ever since my first book, which was
published in 1983. And I laid out this, this
mattering thing, and it was really to try to
understand my main character who is very different from
me, and my editor said, uh, why is she
so unhappy? And I said, oh, why is she
so unhappy? She feels like she doesn't matter. And
that got me thinking since 1983 about this thing,
and I have just been, I talked to people
about this all the time. Most of my conversations
are about this. You sit next to me on
a bus, you're gonna start, we're gonna start talking
about May. I wanna hear how you go about
it. I've never met anybody yet. It's different as
the people I've been speaking to over these past
over 40 years, who didn't fit into one of
these four categories. We can change them, uh, the
transcenders, the socializers, the heroic drivers, and the competitors.
But so far, everyone I've spoken to, read about,
I read a lot of biographies, please it's fit
into these. So should I explain? What they are,
yeah, yeah, so, um, yeah, so I just want
to make sure that it's, it's somewhat empirical. Not
formally, you know, I'm, and I'm open to counterexamples,
right, and, and, and falsification, but this is what
I have found. Um, SO the transgenders are, are
those who want cosmic mattering, um, they want to
feel that they were created for a particular, that
they were created by a particular purpose by A
metaphysical transcendent being, whether they call it God or
something vague or, you know, Atman, whatever, you know,
whatever, something trans empirical that created the laws of
nature, created perhaps the laws of morality to and
who created them purposefully. Intentionally, so that they actually
have a role to play in the narrative of
eternity. There is no greater sense of mannering than
that, you know, I, I'm, I am not a
transcender, but I recognize and I respect, respect as
a manifestation of the longing to matter. Transcenders, uh,
those who go about it in this way. Um,
uh,
DO you, would you include, uh, religious people, ascetics,
and people like that among the transcenders?
Yes, and you know, anybody who thinks, um, that
our reason for living, you know, for, for, for.
Existence, um, it, it is, has something to do
with the nature of the cosmos in general, that
our, our mattering is out there in some sense,
you know, and we have to recognize that, of
course, transcenders recognize many different forms of this. Hence,
you know, they just can disagree with each other
sometimes very bloodily, right? Religious wars, jihads, crusades, all
these things, right? But, um, this, you gotta give
it to them in terms of, in terms of
mattering, short of, short of lunacy and short of
thinking that you yourself are transcendent, you know, um,
um. This is a very, very satisfactory, and so,
so many of the religious people I, I talked
to or spiritual, you know, it doesn't have to
be the conventional religions, um, will say to me,
you know, since I'm not, I don't have such
a metaphysical belief, what gets you out of bed
in the morning? What, what, what, how do you
proceed with your life? How do you know what's
right? How, what, what's wrong? You know, this is
One of the things I, I say in the
book is, yeah, the transcenders tend to universalize, but
so do other people as well. We'll, we'll get
to that. Let me just talk about these other,
which ones should I do next? Socializers, heroics, yeah,
let's perhaps do the socializers.
Yeah, socialize. I have found in my informal discussions,
most people seem to be socializers. That is, they
collapse this connectedness, uh, them, you know, with, well,
I should say that. The most, most of the
people I talked to, I'm take that back, most
of the people I talked to tend to think
of mattering in terms of mattering to others. Um,
IT may be mattering to those others who are
in their lives, you know, the, the family, the
friends, the lovers, the colleagues, neighbors, whatever, or it
may be perfect strangers, like the need, the need
for fame, the longing for fame to matter to.
Hordes of strangers, um, you know, to be beginning
to be feeling that you're deserving of attention of
all of these people can make you feel like,
yes, you are deserving of your own attention, you
know, if, if, if all the world is is
is waiting to see. What I eat for breakfast
or who my next romantic partner is or whatever
the hell, you know, um, yeah, then, then, then
I must matter. I, I found it's really interesting.
It, um, there's, there are actually studies that show
that, um, the, the desire for fame has really
grown, um, and that, that's very interesting, and we
can talk about that, uh, but, you know, the
younger generation. Uh, A certain, uh, questionnaires have shown
that they would be willing to do all sorts
of things, have no romantic partner, not have children.
You know, move to another place if they can
be famous. So, so, but that is the mattering
to others. Um, YOU may want to dominate the
others, it's, it's not necessarily wholesome. Um,
SO do you think that perhaps people who post
too much on social media are socializers?
Yes, and, and you do, you get a certain
something. I, I used to tweet because, you know,
my publisher said, oh, you have, you're not on
social media at all, you gotta, you, you gotta
get on there. And I used to tweet, and
I remember it, you know, when people paid attention
to me in that way, you know, when they
liked it or retweeted, I would feel a little
something, not much, cause that's not my That's not
my way of trying to matter, but, but yeah,
it does make you feel something good. People who
live for fame tend not to actually be so
very happy often. Um, AND that's interesting too. Um,
I was going to say that is actually interesting
because, uh, many of, for example, the ancient philosophers
and some of the more modern ones, uh, actually
warned against uh caring for fame or putting fame
on a high pedestal.
Exactly, it's, it, it, it's a very unstable kind
of grounding for your mattering to me, this constant
attention from. Um, FROM, from strangers, that's basically what
it means to, to, uh, to on fame, and,
um, and, you know, and it's, it's, it's, it's,
it's unstable and the, and, and these crowds are
fickle, and it can drive you to do crazy
things. There's a Wikipedia page that is devoted to
all the deaths of people who did outrageously crazy
things in order to You know, go viral. You
know, people climbing, do nutty things, you know, and
it's, yeah, but it really, this is a form
that the longing to matter can take, and anyway,
so socializers, um,
how about the competitors
then? Competitors are interesting, and that's sense they are
really people who feel that mattering is zero-sum. They,
they, they, they. To, to the extent that they
feel that they matter, they have to feel that
they matter more than others. And, and for some
of them, can I, can I mention a, a
political figure? Sure. Our very own president here in
the United States. I mean, he had, he's in
competition with everybody. He, he has to prove he's
better than everybody in everything, except for his own
flesh and blood who are regarded as extensions of
themselves, or his lackeys, you know, but he, he
is, you know, he is such a an out
there picture of the extreme competitive. Sometimes competitors can
seem like The next group that I'm gonna talk
about, heroic strivers, um, and I'll just say briefly
what they are, they are, uh, people who, they're
not trying to impress other people, uh, they are
really, it's, it's all about they have certain standards
of excellence, um, could be intellectual, artistic. Athletic, um,
or ethical, right, um, that they have to meet
in order to be able to live with themselves
in order to have this relationship with themselves of
mattering, um, and, um. I, back to competitors, so
there's a scientist, I know, very Good scientist, he
got a Nobel Prize, as a matter of fact,
and another friend of mine who knows the scientists
said to me about him, said he was happy
for all of 15 minutes when he got that
call from Stockholm, and then he remembered that other
people have, have gotten Nobel Prizes also. He was
no longer happy. So, you know, competitors can, you
know, they, they can do the amazing things that
heroic strivers do, but in terms of their own
mattering, it's adversarial, um, and, and, and so the
inner being of them. It is very, is, is
very different. I think it's very hard to be
a competitor. You can never rest on your laurels,
not even Nobel, not like Nobel laurels, right? It's
just incredible. You're always, and, and it's, it's, it's,
uh, it really tends to distance your, your, yourself
from other people. Everybody is potential, unless maybe your
own flesh and blood or, you know, those you
can regard as extensions to yourself. It's your competitor.
It's, it's, it's not a great way to live.
Anyway, but, you know, so it's interesting, you know,
why we fall out one way or the other,
um, but, but we do. Um, IT can change.
I started life as a transcendent, that's the way
I was brought up. But I, I, it didn't
suit me. I, I couldn't do it. It didn't
hit the sweet spot at all, and, um, and,
and so I, you know, my own nature came
out. So, you know, it's, I think it's temperament,
talent, interest, culture, to some extent, um, but somehow
or other we fall out in these very different
ways. So the very thing that makes us human,
so human, so uniquely human. Drives us apart, you
know, so makes us live lives that are so
different to the extent that we can be completely
baffled, amused, and appalled by one another. It usually
goes back to the manner and instinct and how
we're realizing it.
So, I, I mean, where would you include, uh,
intellectuals? I mean, do you think that being an
intellectual and caring about a truth with a capital
T involves at least some degree of transcendence?
You know, it depends. Yeah, not transcendence in the
way that I'm using transcenders, you know, the way
I'm using transcenders, it really does require this metaphysical
belief. Um, BUT there, you know, if you are,
if you think of, as, as many heroic strivers
do, think of your, what I call your mattering
project. Um, THE thing that gets you out of
bed in the morning and, you know, and, and,
and to work. Um, IF you think of it
in terms of such ideals as truth, um, or
Um, or justice, um, or, you know, these, these
ideals, these abstract ideals, in some sense, there's a
kind of transcendence, yes, you, there is in that
sense, kind of platonic sense, yes, there's that kind
of, yes, transcendence. This is something bigger than me,
um, truth, justice, uh, courage, you know, whatever, you
know, human excellence, it's, it's, it's somehow it's. However
you think about it, um, yeah, it's something bigger
than Do you think, yeah, do you,
do you think that cosmic mattering and for example
when we as humans attribute some er degree uh
or we think that we are special in comparison.
TO other animals special biologically or special in a
more creationist manner if you are a religious person.
Do you think that those kinds of mattering involve
at least some degree of delusion?
Delusion, well, you know, I think in some sense.
Maybe you'll call me delusional. I think there is
a sense in which we are, our species is
very special, that, um, we, like all creatures are
driven to, you know, devote all our energy to
basically ourselves. We, you know, that's Uh, the organizing
principle of all the instincts, um, but unlike the
other creatures, Who had their own dignity. Um, I
take animals very seriously. I'm a true animal lover,
um, but Uh, we have this need to justify.
This, this, you know, our own biologically given, uh,
drives, and that is, yeah, I, I really do
think that, you know, people talk about the intrinsic
dignity of humans and what does that mean? It's
so vague. I never understood what that meant. I
think we are vaguely gesturing towards this. There's something
dignified about this, even in the worst of us,
and we have so many specimens on display. Uh,
THAT there is something about it, you know, that
feeling the need to justify, uh, your, your own
self, your own existence, your own identity, because your
identity is basically constituted of this. Striving to perpetuate,
uh, one's own survival and, and, and, and flourishing,
and we think, yeah, what makes me worth this?
Um, WHAT do I have to prove to myself
about myself, uh, that would make Me deserving of
this. Um, EVEN if you decide the worst way,
power over others, you know, I'm going to matter
by marching into Ukraine or whatever, right? Um, TERRIBLE
ways of going about it, um, and we need
a standard to, um, adjudicate between good and bad
ways of And I tried to try to answer
that as well, but There is something, there is
something estimable, um, in our species, that, that we
are normative, uh, that we are seeking values, even
if we end up with very bad values, that
there is something there. But, so I don't think
it's delusional. I think there is something. To this,
that there is an intrinsic dignity, uh, to human
beings because of this, because of the normative dimension,
um, that we That we encompass matter longing to
matter. That's what we are, matter longing to matter,
and um that is something, but Animals, you know,
animals don't gain their dignity by being similar to
us. That is arrogant. That is anthro, you know,
anthro
arrogant anthropocentric,
yes, um, but, um. They, they gain their dignity
on their own terms, um, and, and we, and
we ought to recognize that. But yes, there is
something, there is something special I would say about,
uh, you know, because of this capacity, these big
brains, capacity for self-reflection. We become value seekers. We
bring values into this world. That's something.
So you're a philosopher, what do you think is
the role, if any, that philosophy can play er
in our mattering?
Well, huh. Um, I mean, philosophy is a wonderful
subject. It's, uh, some people, that's how they, uh,
pursue their mattering, you know, it's an intellectual endeavor,
right? Um, I think it's, but I think. You
know, and I, for most of my life, I
have to confess I was interested in very little
technical problems in philosophy. I came to philosophy from
the sciences, from math and physics. I was interested
in solvable technical, um, problems, um, but, um, I
think much of philosophy is Devoted to problems, um,
like values, that this sort of thing, um, that
face all of us, you know, that, By being
mad or longing to matter, uh, we Uh Unavoidably
enter into philosophical territory, uh, and some philosophers have
an awful lot to tell us about that. Uh,
I'm a great, uh, fan of the philosopher Spinoza,
uh, who, of course, uh, derived, uh, from Portuguese,
Portuguese roots, his, his dad, his mom. Uh, WERE,
were born in Portugal. He, he, he went to,
to, uh, Amsterdam. The family went to Amsterdam in
the 17th century, but anyway,
yeah, and my compatriot Antonio Damasio also has a
book on Spinoza.
Yes, we've been on panels together. We are both
great fans of Spinoza. Spinoza was prescient about so
much. And I, um, yeah, I mean, I, I,
I've taught Spinoza, it was a very unusual thing
to do is having come from philosophy of science
and philosophy of math, but, um, I find, uh,
you know, that he sheds a tremendous amount of
light, and he made the Enlightenment. He seeded the
Enlightenment. It it came 100 years after him. Uh,
BUT, you know, he is the first person of
the modern world to try to answer these deep
existential ethical questions through reason, uh, because, you know,
it, it began in ancient Greece. Uh, BUT then,
you know, the transcenders took over the world, you
know, and, uh, all the
the scholastic philosophers, the
scholastic philosophers, but it was they were all religious
thinkers, you know, and everybody identified themselves in terms
of their religious orientation. It's it's all great. Theories
of persecution, depending on disagreements between transgenders. But, um,
you know, in the 70th century, and he really
is, I gotta say, the first to go back
to those ancient existential questions. What is it to
be human? What are we supposed to be doing
here? How do I Justify myself to myself. How
do I, how I, how do I live a
life that is meaningful in my own eyes, um,
that the Greeks had begun, um, and, and, and
goes back to it. And then of course he
was excommunicated by his own Jewish community, uh, community,
and, uh, damned by the rest of Christian Europe.
So, um, but people read him. They read him
in order to refute him, in order to make
any progress in um academia, you had to have
your refutations of Spinoza lined up. Um, AND study
them. That was very dangerous because people read him,
and slowly his way of thinking began to sink
in, and 100 years later we have the Enlightenment.
So, yeah, ideas really matter, especially these, these kinds
of ideas, the kinds of ideas that are directed
to what it is to be human, what it
is to to have a satisfactory life, a good
life, um, to not get our one chance of
this wrong.
Um, AND what is your approach to religion, because,
of course, and I've talked on the show with
many, many cognitive scientists of religion already, and religion
for many people, I mean I guess still for
a majority of humanity plays a big role in.
Their own mathering projects, let's say so, uh, but
of course there are secular people, atheists, non-religious people,
scientists that look at religion as a form, at
least to some extent a form of delusion. So
how do you approach it?
Um, I, I, I would have a few years
ago put myself in that group of a delusion.
I'm, uh, yes, um. And uh I have more
sympathy now for the difficulties of being human. Not
everybody, I, you know, I, Richard Dawkins, he's a
good friend of mine. We've spoke, you know, and
we've spoken about these sorts of things. I mean,
he says he, he gets such. Um, SATISFACTION out
of his life of science, you know, to know,
learn the laws of nature, to make them clear
to others, to, to revel in the beauty of
the laws of, of nature, which, yes, I'm susceptible
to this very, very much. That's my, very much
my notion of transcendence, but not all of us
are made for that, right? That, that's, we are,
we are diverse. You know, diversity is spoken about
so much, you know, racial diversity about, you know,
the, the most important diversity is the diversity that
makes us go through different areas of the mattering
map. Um, I can't ask somebody to revel in
the laws of nature and learning the laws of
nature and making them clear to others that I
Have or that Dawkins has, thank goodness in some
sense that we have many different talents, many different
passions, many different interests, um, that make us seek
our mannering in different ways. It's hard to be
human. Whatever is doing it for you as long,
and here's the proviso, the guardrail, as long as
your way of Trying to realize you're mattering doesn't
cause you to treat others or to regard others
as mattering less um than you. I think the
intrinsic ethical mattering, you know, is there in everybody,
and it is, you know, one has to respect
it, um, and, and, and try to understand its
manifestations in other people. But if your way, excuse
me, if your way. Leads to your regarding others
as mattering less. Um, THIS is not admissible, this
is not, and one can argue on purely intellectual
grounds, um, as to why this is wrong, to
the extent that any of us ethically matter, we
all matter to that same extent, um, and, you
know, yeah, so. As long as there's, you know,
a tolerance, uh, for, for others' way of approaching
this existential dilemma that we all have, um, If
it works for you, if You do good works
by it. It's all in the works, right? It's
all, you know, if you live the kind of
life that I would say is counter entropic, um,
rather than works with entropy, um, you're OK, whatever,
whatever you believe.
Yes, I agree with you and uh through my
conversations with cognitive scientists of religion, I also learned
to not look at religiosity as a form of
delusion and as actually a natural phenomenon, something that
is also part of. Our evolved psychology, at least
to some extent, and I've had, uh, academics on
the show who are religious and they do excellent
academic work. So, I mean, and, and they respect
science a lot and they. Um, GET, uh, information
from science to inform their work, their own work
and so on, so I mean, I don't think
that religion, uh, is is even necessarily a matter
of believing in unreal things,
so, yeah, you know, and it, it could be,
you know, I mean, for many it's just. A
form of, um, you know, sort of connectedness. There's
community, um, there's, you know, and, you know, they
were religion takes so many different forms, um, but
I have known personally in my life, um, religious
people, including my own father, um, who, who, who
I respect as much as I've ever respected anybody,
um, you know, that they, uh, Yeah, it can
be, it can be a force of, um, as
I call it, counteranthropic working against disorder, um, creative,
not destructive, um. It all of these ways of
trying to satisfy our longing to matter, um, can,
can be intolerant, you know, when a scientist says,
Look, I mean, I'm doing the most important thing
in the world. Um, I'm, you know, I'm making
the universe clear to people. Why doesn't everybody do
this? Why doesn't everybody seek their meaning in the
way that I am? That's, there's an urge to
universalize what, what, um, and it's not just transcenders
who do it, um, it's all across the memory
map you find, you'd find, um, and I have
a bunch of, you know, statements that I've been
collecting over the decades, um, of. Of people of,
of these, you know, these, these universalizing statements. So
for example, an editor, um, Diana Freeland, her name
was, it was the editor of, um, the fashion
Vogue, Vogue magazine. She was a great fashion icon,
and she said, you know, you've got to be
well dressed. It's what gets you up in the
morning, it gets you down the stairs. Um, WITHOUT
it, you're nothing. You're nothing. This is a statement
of real denial of mattering to all of us
slobs, you know, I don't care very much about
fashion, um, you know, it'd be all over, you
know, and, and I, I've got it from scientists,
I've got it from artists, from novelists, from musicians,
whatever it is that they are staking their life
on, staking their life on, you know, that there's
a great Propensity to universalize it and say if
it's really doing it for me, then it ought
to be doing it for everybody. There's a, a
mistake in the logic there that I'm very eager
to, to analyze and to expose, but it comes
very, very naturally to us. This is a way
in which philosopher, even analytic philosophers trained to look
at every statement and try to take it apart.
You know, is it true? What would make it
true? What would make it false, um, can be,
can be of some use even to non- philosophers,
I think.
Mhm. Yes, because we have to take into account
that even though we share many aspects of our
psychology, there's also personality traits, there's other kinds of
psychological traits that make people different in terms of
their values, their interests, and so I mean, I
don't think that uh a universalizing. Project in terms
of mattering and also in other aspects uh would
be a very successful one and also it would
probably be very oppressive.
Exactly, exactly, yes, and as I see the, the,
the guard rail, the one fundamental thing is, you
know, to the extent that any of us matter,
we, we all matter, and anything that Um, violates
that. This is, this is not a way to
be living your life. Find another way, um, you
know, it's uh, and look at your own. THE
role of your own ego in all of this.
Um, SO, yeah, so, you know, the self-reflection that
gets us going on this project, it has to
be constantly exercised in operation so that we are
reflecting on the answers that we've come to and,
and, and, and being open to other answers that
are Offered or at least sympathize uh with other
ways of doing it, and as you say, see
the role of our own individual psychology, you know,
um, in, in, in, in, in contributing to this,
you know, you could I love basketball players. I
tell you, I mean, I can watch, I, I,
I moved, you know, because they can fly, they
defy gravity. They're, you know, I wish I could
be, you know, if I could live my life
over, if I could come back as anything, it
would be to be a center forward, but I
am 5'2. This is not a way for me
to go about, uh, you know, there are certain
limitations, you know, uh, physical, intellectual, emotional, um, that
sends us on our particular mattering project, sometimes the
wrong one, you know, sometimes people You know, if
I write about, you know, a very good friend
of mine who was very musically talented, very musically
talented, had, had, had, had, uh, gotten a fellowship
to a fine conservatory and Um, but he could,
he, he, and, and, and his whole life was
a classical guitar that was his instrument of choice,
um, and then he couldn't, he couldn't do it,
he couldn't make it, he couldn't make a living
from it. Um, CLASSICAL guitar is, it's very hard.
There are no, the, uh, uh, uh. Pieces written
specifically for a classical or very few, and you
can't be hired by an orchestra, um, and anyway,
he had to find, um, heartbreakingly, I mean, he
went through, this is what we call an existential
crisis, when your mattering project is failing you. Or
you feel that you are failing it, and you
may think it's the most important thing in the
world, right? Um, BUT yet you have to face,
maybe, no, it's not going right. Maybe it's because
of you, maybe it's because of the world, maybe
you just haven't had the lucky breaks or whatever,
but don't waste your life. Um, AT a certain
point, you've got to change your mattering project, and
that's exactly what my friend did. He became Um,
uh, uh, he got his PhD in comparative literature.
He's a writer, he's a filmmaker, he's a, he's
a, he's a marvelous guy, you know, he's still
an artist, um, because that was still, you know,
that's where his passion lay, but he changed, um,
and so, you know, these are, these are all.
Problems we face because of the need to matter.
Yeah, you know, you mentioned basketball, for me, I'm
more into soccer because of the kind of culture
I was brought in. I mean, here in Portugal,
people are crazy about soccer, but uh I could
never be an athlete because even when I I
was very little, I mean, 56 years old, I,
I was already very much into books and old
movies. I mean, I would just want to watch
all the time, uh my mother's uh videotape collection
of black and white movies.
Yeah, my kids too. They love the old movies.
I used to show that, yeah, yeah, yeah. So,
you know, we, these inclinations show themselves very early,
you know, sometimes, you know, parents make a terrible
mistake, the same kind of mistake, you know, of
universalizing, but, you know, but caring most about their
kids, you know, that, like, oh, look at what
philosophy has done for me. ALLOWED me to overcome
all my existential despair and blah blah blah, um,
you know, and, uh, yes, my children, whom I
love more than anything, they must be philosophers too.
No, you know, it, it is, this is a
mistake often that we make with the people that
we love the most, um, that we, you know,
what has been our, our saving, uh, project. We
think at least at the very least, they ought
to have and and and sometimes parents, and I've
seen this over and over again, they feel rejected.
It's like, oh, so you think I don't matter,
you know, um, uh, you know, I, why are
you not duplicating my life? Uh, ARE you telling
me that my way is wrong? So, yeah, I
mean, all of these things, it, it, it, it
feeds into our life in so many ways and
the raising of our children, the education of our
children, our political, uh, choices, and, oh God. In
everything, you know, which is why I was scared
to write about the book. It just was, ah,
how do I tame this? It's too, but OK.
So, uh, how do you think we develop our
meing projects individually?
Yeah, you know, it is, um, you know, some,
some of it is, some of it, it's random
in life, things are random, but I do think
we have, um, you, you mentioned personality, and there
are psychologists of personality, personality theory. And there's this
one theory that I was very interested to learn
about, um, the Murray-McClellan theory of personality that claims
that we divide up into three different types. We
all have these three basic needs. Uh, THE need
for, um, uh, affiliation with, with one another, the
need for, um, some feeling of, uh, influence, of
status, of, of power, um, power actually is the
way he, he says power, um, and the, the
need for, um, uh, for, for excellence, uh, that,
but In different personalities, one of these three dominates,
and he had, they had tests that they had
worked out, very interesting tests to see what dominated.
They were very interested in, no, no, they were
Harvard professors, they were both Harvard professors way before
my time, but, um, and, and so they Giving
into that urge to universalize, thought the best thing
is wanting to be excellent, you know, the need
for achievement, they called it the need for achievement,
um, and they wanted, they had programs for, uh,
making people over into achievers, uh, not affiliators, you
know, but, but, um, and, and even, uh, trying
to make, uh, countries over into achievers, right, into,
and, you know, This is, again, this is the,
no, not everybody is going to be so happy
feeling that they, that's what they have to do
to achieve, to be what I call a heroic
striver. Some of us, yes, that's what we need.
But, but in any case, there, there is a
way in which at least 3 of these socializers,
um, competitors, and heroic strivers, um, correspond to these
3. Transcenders is, is, is something else, OK, and
transcenders can, can take various forms. Some of them
want power. Um, SOME transcenders, you know, those are
the ones who, you know, want to convert the
world to their particular religious view. Lord save us,
and um there are those who are heroic strivers,
you know, perhaps intellectual, perhaps ethical, um, and then
there are those who are, you know, who are
the socializers, you know, uh, those who want to
work for their community, maybe perhaps becoming pastors, or,
you know, my father was, was a clergyman, um,
and, uh, you know, and he was, he was
a, he was, he was a Socializer, he, that's
what he cared about, helping other people. Um, SO,
it, it takes many different forms. Again, another reason
not to condemn all religious people, depends what form
it takes, um.
Uh, BUT do you think that, uh, with the
sort of, um, individual traits, uh, that distinguish people
from one another and how they get to develop
their own mattering projects, it is possible to develop
some sort of objective standard to distinguish between better
and worse ways to respond to the mattering instinct.
Thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you for
asking that question. Yes, um, and that's really, really
my goal, you know, the Spinoza, you know, he
does so much in. His work, but he calls
it the ethics, you know, when I, I teach,
we teach it to my students, it's like, what
do we have to go through all of this
to get to the ethics? Yes, you have to
go through all of this, but, but by his
calling it the ethics, he's telling us that's, that
was the point of the whole project, and that's
the whole point of my project too. That is
these objective standards, you know, if it's OK, we
should be tolerant, it's hard to be human, however
people are doing it, let them do it, you
know. Um, BUT, but some people are doing it,
um, wrong, ethically wrong, and some, and, and what,
what are the, what's the something objective, something that
can differentiate between better and worse ways of Satisfying
our manner and instinct, but that yet wide enough
to take in all of us transcenders, socializers, rogues
drivers, and competitors too. Um, AND what I think
is I go back again to 2nd law of
thermodynamics, entropy, life. Life is the resistance to entropy,
um, you know, that, that is all of our
forces of every living system is trying to push
against this disorder, uh, that is our. Her, or,
or end, uh, you know, the disorder is death.
I, and that's where I think we could take
our wide and yet differentiating standard of distinguishing between
good and bad mattering projects. The way I judge
a person, myself and others, is, am I working
with entropy? Is it going to be more entropy
because I'm alive, or am I battling with my
battling to Justify myself to myself. Am I battling
in the direction of life against entropy, um, and
against disorder, against Against destructiveness. So anything that is
creative, as opposed to destructive, anything that that uh
conduces to well-being, um, as opposed to suffering and
death, um. The beauty, as opposed to ugliness, civility,
as opposed to dissension, all of these things, knowledge,
as opposed to ignorance, these are all hard things.
They take so much work for our poor little
overtaxed brains. Um, THEY take so much work because
they are counterentropic. Whatever is worth living for is
counterentropic, just like life is. That's, that's how I
judge us. That's how I judge myself.
Do you think that it is possible for people
to live life while acknowledging they do not matter
or believing they do not matter?
It depends, you know, if, if they think, look,
I don't matter cosmically, I'm going to, I'm here
for a short time, I'm gonna go out of
existence. Nobody's gonna remember me in 100 years, whatever,
you know, in, yeah, we can live with that.
I think it's sanity. I mean, we're not, I'm
not gonna say that all transcenders are lunatics, but,
you know, I think it, it, it, it can
be very sane and very rational. Um, IT'S certainly
what I believe, right? But in the sense of,
I might as well not have been here at
all for all the Good I'm doing, um. I,
I, I really, you know, in this. If it's
the sort of I don't matter, that's indicative of
I have no reason to live, um, no, no,
it's not, it's not compatible with well-being. We are
willing to even, we're willing to sacrifice our life
in order to Satisfy the manner and instincts, you
know, and, and, you know, that's what mourners do,
whether they do it for a good cause or
or not. It is, it, it is so deep
within us. And so the people I've known who
have been suffering um from severe depression, do you
know what they say? I don't matter. Um, OTHERS
do, right, but I don't, nothing I can do
will ever make me mad, um. And, and, and
so that is not, you know, the, the, it
depends what you mean by I don't matter if
you're talking about the human condition, it's OK, you
know,
um, yeah, you know, but the interesting thing about
depression is that there's also that notion of depressive
realism where it seems that people who suffer from
depression at the same time also have a more
um objective uh or. Yeah, uh, I mean, I
mean they are, they, they tend to, uh, to
look at things in a more realistic
way and maybe actually to convince ourselves that this,
you know, mannering project. You know, really matters. You
know, it's, it's, it's very hard cause you don't,
you don't want the universalizing either. If it matters,
if it's really grounding my life, then why isn't
it grounding your life? Why are you not doing
it exactly the way I'm doing? This is, you
know, it's all very hard, but I, um, and
maybe for a lot of people, you know, um,
the way that they convince themselves of their mattering
is. I, it is a, is a little bit
delusional, right? It is this sort of, yeah, yeah,
this is the way, this is the only way,
it's my way or no way, that sort of
thing, and that's, that is delusional. Um, AND so,
you know, that could be contributing to why, uh,
those who are depressed or compared to the general
population. Um, ARE, are, are a bit more realistic,
but if you, it depends which group you compare
the depressed to. If you compare them to scientists,
philosophers, no, I bet they're no more realistic than
we are. Most of us who live with that
sense of, yeah, in the long run we don't
matter. Look, the universe is going to heat death.
Nothing's gonna matter, right? I mean, there's a sort
of, you know, but uh yeah, so I, I
think one can be a realistically Fully engaged. And
I think one of the best ways I find
to do it is, you know, when I think
about, you know what? I'm fighting against entropy. I'm
fighting with life, you know, and by the way,
you know, being a good parent, good, you know,
raising flourishing children, that is a difficult, difficult task,
um, and, and it's highly counter entropic, you know,
you don't have to be anything great, uh, or,
or different from most people or have special talents,
uh, in order to be. Uh, HAVE a mannering
project that that's counteranthropic, um, and that's hard work,
that takes a tremendous amount of work. All of
them do everything, everything, everything worth doing. Takes tremendous
amount of energy.
So what do you make of approaches, I, I
guess we've already ended up touching a little bit
on nihilism, but what do you make of approaches
like nihilism and absurdism? I mean absurdism in the
more, uh, camu should I say Camusian sense?
I'm not sure how you right, um, yeah, yeah,
no, it's just sort of it's they're very interesting
to me, you know, because since I've become interested.
Unusually for an analytic philosopher in these existential questions,
um, you know, I, I, I took to reading
them, and it's sort of proved, and it's interesting,
you know, they Yeah, everything is absurd. So what
does it mean, you know, what it means, you
know, this moment that we step outside of ourselves,
and we look at how committed we are to
this one thing in the whole universe as if
it's the most important thing in the world, and
how absurd that is. It's absurd, you know, and
yet we have to return to that life, you
know, we are going to pursue our life, and
that makes for For absurdity, you know, I, I,
my, my, my, uh, PhD advisor was the philosopher
Thomas Nagel, um, and he has this lovely, lovely,
an analytic philosopher who has this lovely article called
The Absurd. Um, AND, and he says, you know,
that when we, he calls it, you know, self-transcendence,
when we step outside of ourselves and look at
ourselves, it's with that sense of, uh, detached amazement,
um, of, of watching, uh, ants struggling up an
anthill and sliding down. And throwing up and sliding
down, you know, and that's, that's sort of what
it's like, you know, so that, that captures sort
of the absurdity of this thing that I think
gets us going on this mannering, on our mannering
projects, um, but which is taking a step that,
that Nagle doesn't take, but, um, But that, but,
and, and, and, and what's so interesting is that
the existentialists came up with their own mattering project,
um, which was to live with every moment of
our lives with the acknowledgement of how absurd. It
is, you know, and that's what courage is, you
know, that to be a Camus Camus says in
the myth of Sisyphus at the end of it,
you know, to live defiantly, you know, that yes,
we don't, we don't really matter, but we're going,
we're living as if we do, and, and, and,
but facing every moment that we don't, and, and
that's what makes us heroes, you know, that's what
it is to be authentic and to be a
Um, Oh my gosh, do you hear that?
Uh, YES,
it's the sky is opening up. I have a
glass roof. I, I literally live with a glass.
Oh,
no, uh, yeah, don't worry too much about it.
I mean, I can, I, I can put a
nodule filter when I'm at it.
OK, excellent. Yeah. So anyway, so yeah, so, so
it, it's sort of absurdity is in some sense,
um, yeah, that is, that's one way of putting.
What it is to acknowledge this. Incommensurable gap between
what entropy demands we devote to ourselves, um. And
what we really are in this universe, you know,
unless, unless you're,
so, so do you think that as Camus said,
we should imagine Sisyphus happy just pushing the rock
up the hill, and we should think of ourselves
as Sisyphus in this life.
That's right, that's right, we're just going to. Yes,
uh, you know, but, but being aware of how
futile it really is, you know, and, and that's
what makes us heroes, that's what makes us authentic.
We don't get pulled into. You know, and that's,
yeah, I think that that's fine for some. I
mean, not everybody, I'm not gonna tell everybody, but
once again, universalizing, you know, to say this is
authentic, and this is just, you know, not, not
authentic, is to say that some lives in some
sense matter more than others. I don't think that's
a good way to go. Nihilism would be to
say that there is no way of distinguishing between
better and worse ways of satisfying this, you know,
that, uh. You know, Putin's sway, which is causing
so much, such an increase of entropy in this
universe of, of instability, of, of, of disorder, of
suffering, of death, um, meaning, I mean, just uprootedness,
everything, you know, this is disorder, this is a
person who as powerful as he is, is. Not
living the way he ought to be living. He
is working with entropy instead of against it, um.
There's a Mother, who I, uh, feature at the
end of the book, a woman who I, I
didn't know her, I only Got to meet her
daughter, uh, but, uh, an extraordinary person this mother
had been. She was, uh, was in China, um,
lived in China as her daughter lives in China,
and had, um, during the period when there was
the one child per family. Uh, DICTUM from the
government, and all of these given you can have
only one child, people wanted a boy and not
a girl. Boys matter more than girls, and, um,
and, uh, so she was a garbage collector. Uh,
SHE would, you know, take in, take it to
the recycling, and then, you know, the, the, the
poorest person in the world didn't even have a
roof over her head. Um, SHE found babies, little
girls, uh, that, that parents had left out on
the street or in garbage, uh, dumps or dumpsters
or in the bathroom. She raised more than 30
little girls. This impoverished woman, I have pictures of
her in the book that Her daughter, her daughter
who was found, you know, was not, and um,
so this is, this is some money, I compare
her to Putin, this, this impoverished woman who, who
is, who is responsible for all of these lives,
who gave everything, you know, and she, she found
some Jell-O or whatever, you know, would go to
the children. Anyway, you know, that this is and
and somehow we know this, we intuitively know. We,
we feel moved by such people, um, so I
think that this, you know, a way of trying
to capture what distinguishes the good projects from the
bad is, is entropy. It starts with entropy, it
ends with entropy. I'm really an entropically obsessed person.
I've, I've always that it, I think it has
a tremendous amount to teach us.
Yeah, you know, I have to say that I
got tricked by Camus into liking absurdism because when
I read the myth of Sisyphus when I was
around 20, um, I mean, I start reading the
book and then at a certain point he starts
talking about Dostoyevsky, Kafka, Herman Melville, and I was
like, oh come on, are you really mentioning all
of my favorite writers?
Yes, yes, yes, yes, and then of course all
these people are worth mentioning because they were heroic
strivers and they achieved something amazing, you know, they
all achieved something amazing, but, you know, we can't,
we can't put that out as the standard for
living a good life. You know, that's not fair.
Um, AND anyway, you know, um, extraordinariness can come
in many, many different forms. That, that Chinese mother
was extraordinary, um, what it took to be able
to do what she did, um, and then I
asked this, um, The daughter, her name is Juju,
um, uh, did you ever try to get in
touch with your birth mother to find out who
your birth mother is? And she, she, she started
crying and she said, I had the best mother
in the world. Nobody could have a better mother,
you know, I mean, to, to have done such
a thing in this world is, is something to
applaud. So, yeah, I think there, I think, I
think there are objective values. And I think, I
think science, you know, can tell us what they
are, um, in terms of counterentro, are you working
with entropy or you're working against it? Um, I
think that's the best standard that I've come up
with for judging a person's life.
Oh, OK, so let me just ask you one
last question, and as a philosopher, I think this
will be a provocative question for you. So,
As if as if these other questions haven't been
provided. Yeah, but,
but I think there's one in particular,
uh,
I, I, I mean, do you agree when Socrates,
or at least this is a quote attributed to
him, when Socrates says the unexamined life is not
worth living.
Depends what he meant by that, um. You know,
I don't like this statement because it, I don't
like anything. That entails some people are of no
value, you know, um, we are all of value,
we are all of value, um, but if he's
saying, you know, that you, if you haven't. If
you've just adopted the norms of justification, um, that
were passively given to you, and you haven't used
your power of self-reflection to examine them. Uh, YOU'VE
got some work to do. You've, you, you get,
get, get back to work. Um, AND he, of
course he was addressing the Athenians who were people
who thought that the Athenians were better than everybody
else in the world, just to be born an
Athenian was to be better than everybody else, including
fellow Greeks, and then, you know, they were always
boring with people and blah blah, you know, and
um. And, and of course, in that time that
was a that was a quite frequent thing for
for various empires, inhabitants of empires, you think, but
they really, you know, they believe this very much,
and he was taking that on. He was telling
his fellow Athenians, don't just passively think that you
matter because you happen to have been born in
Athenian. It's much harder than that. That if that's
what he was saying, as I do believe he
was saying, um, then, then yes, I agree with
him. I totally agree with him. It's, we shouldn't,
we shouldn't just passively accept, uh, these, the norm
by which we justify ourselves and often condemn others,
uh. Yeah, she said, Does that seem right? So
I, I, I, I always like to, uh, Use
the principle of maximum charity in in interpreting others,
including philosophers, including a great philosopher like Socrates, right,
as filtered through Plato. Who you know I like
very much, you know I like Plato very much,
yes.
Well, I mean, for me personally, I think that
whatever he meant by that, I still think that
the unexamined life can be worth living.
Yeah, yeah, but, you know what I mean, you
know, it depends what you mean, you know, look,
it's As long as, you know, I have a,
I have a friend, um, who, uh, he developed
the, um, God, what did he develop? I think
he developed the way of, of treating children who
were born to mothers who had AIDS, to immediately
being able to treat them when they were born,
um, and so that they were able to survive
and live. And then he told me that he,
he's a wonderful man, um, and he, he told
me that he, he's, he's been. Haunted by the
view that so many of these children who lived,
um, have were born into terrible circumstances, into impoverished,
difficult, uh, disordered lives, and that he feels guilty
about this. Maybe by developing this medicine, he increased
misery in the world, you know, so this is
it was interesting. But, and I said, you know,
I bet if you went to every one of
those, of those children now and ask them, are
you glad that you are alive rather than never
to have been born, they would, they would say
yes, you know, that, that there is, there is
something of such value in, in, in every human
life, and we, you know, we, we feel this,
we feel this, we could feel this in ourselves,
we feel it in others, um, whether they're living
examined life. For not.
Yeah, OK, so look, I'm seeing that we've reached
our time limit, so let's end the interview here,
and the book is again The Mathering Instinct, How
Our Deepest Longing Drives Us and divides us. I'm
of course leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview, and Doctor Goldstein, thank you
so much for coming on the show again. It's
always a big pleasure to talk with you. Oh
boy, I could talk to you forever. I, I
love talking to you. Um, AND
perhaps, well, maybe we'll have to do, uh, to
have another one of these conversations sooner rather than
later instead of waiting for another 7 years.
That's right, another pandemic, another whatever, but yes, I,
I would love, I would love that. I think
you're, uh, you're a wonderful discussant.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Jr. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.